Actually, it has gotten some very interesting
reviews. There was a book published. I was trying
to think. It was Lexington or Heath. I can't
remember publishers that had a chapter in it
dealing with MOPAC and citizen conflicts with
local governments. And I'm not sure he did a real
good job. But I have a friend who will go nameless
that's with the highway department. And... And I
will go so far as to say that they have done a major
analysis of Mopac and land use impacts and change
and traced it historically. And they cannot find
where Mopac, per se, has had any substantial
impact on the surrounding neighborhoods. Now,
there are two reasons for this, and they were
design factors built into the freeway. One is
there's no access road. And so not only is there no
access road, but
Interestingly
enough,
my friend who did this study, which has not been
released and may never see the light of day, found
that the expressway itself did not make any
substantial impacts in terms of land use patterns
or changes. that, in fact, it tended to verify what
was already happening. There was already a
conversion process going on in the area.
Conversion from what to what? Well, basically
from single family houses to some corner stores,
markets, to small apartments, six, eight unit
townhouse apartments. And part of this reflects
the fact that Mopac extends past, essentially,
the west fringe of the University of Texas, which
logically was an area for redevelopment at higher
intensity and density, that zoning had well
preceded the redevelopment. In many cases, the
redevelopment was occurring prior to any
publication of the plans to build Mopac. And in
fact, interestingly enough, since Mopac's been
built up and been open, the conversion process has
slowed down. It was really a reflection of
something that had already happened. Now,
because there was no access road built on Mopac,
this limited any potential for strip
development. You know, it's really the way all
urban freeways ought to be built. I don't know if
you've ever tried to get on Mopac, but if you don't
know where the entry ramp is, you might drive all
the way back to the river before you can get on. I've
done it once or twice. It's kind of frustrating.
It's a planner, even. Yes. Well, you know, that
happens. Did it get lost in Austin? Not very often.
So you wind up with an expressway that has limited
access, that's infrequent, and it's hard to get
on, and it has no service road. And so it doesn't
really have the level of community impact. Now, it
did separate some neighborhoods, and I won't deny
that. A lot of the area it went through was state
land to begin with, reservations, National Guard
posts, and so forth. So Camp Mayberry. And so, you
know, a lot of things that happened. Now, it did
tend to stimulate some development on the north
end at 183, where some of the interchanges are, but
that would be expected. Also, development was
occurring in that direction in any case. Mopac
certainly reinforced that. Now, when it comes to
the south section of Mopac, something else
entirely happened in the way it impacted South
Austin. because all of the methods of getting into
North Austin from South Austin are terrible,
suddenly the prospect of having a major
underutilized freeway open, which could take you
from South Austin, from a very desirable area to
live in, in terms of scenery and terrain, very
close into downtown, very close into the state
bureaucratic headquarters, very close into the
Capitol, and very close to the University of
Texas, on roads that essentially do not carry the
traffic that they are capable of carrying,
creates a tremendous potential for development
in southwest Austin. Furthermore, a certain
nameless individual looks at this and sees an
opportunity for building perhaps the largest
shopping mall in Travis County. You don't want to
name him? Well, we don't want to name everybody.
Well, he was a real estate agent who happened to be
on the planning commission at the time and voted
for the zoning change. And then sold the land based
on the contingency of the zoning change. A little
conflict of interest. Shortly after that, there
was an ethics thing passed by the city. It sounds
like the last high rise in La Jolla. Yeah. So...
moving right along past other little things. But
we see this tremendous shopping center with a
tremendously large parking lot being built on top
of an area that is going to drain into Barton Creek,
which feeds into Barton Pool and Barton Springs,
which is one of the very traditional ancient areas
of Austin that the city holds in reverence. It's a
shrine, really, to the kind of character of the
city. Totally unpolluted spring water. It
doesn't have to be chlorinated. People can go
swimming in it. It's rather chilly, but at the same
time, you know, beautiful sloping area, grass
covered, going down to a natural pool. Well, here
we have this tremendous shopping center with all
the urban runoff, pollutants, oil, and
everything else that's going to work its way down
into there. It spurs all kinds of residential
development with the usual fertilizers,
pesticides, herbicides, leaking sewer pipes and
whatnot, and people get very excited.
Furthermore, it's on top of the Edwards Aquifer
recharge zone. Well, the problem from the real
estate agent's viewpoint, the developer's
standpoint, is they had found out about all this,
as they do when the plans are proposed and made
public, and they go down and slowly begin to build
up their land bank. This is where they're going to
build, beginning in the late 70s through the 80s.
Well, some of the developers said Barton Creek is
going to be a real nightmare because it's so
politically sacrosanct, so we'll go down to the
next creek, Williamson Creek Watershed. Again,
Edwards Aquifer, same pollutant problems,
runoff problems. And this is where the commitment
has been made by developers, the financial
interest of the community, the bankers, that
future development on large scale is going to
occur. Williamson. Well, Williamson Creek and
Barton Creek watershed, basically southwest
Austin. And the outcome, of course, of all of that
is that now people are beginning to be a lot more
environmentally aware. Certainly in Austin, we
have perhaps more civic organizations
associated with environmental issues here per
capita than any place else in the world that don't
like this. Well, here the investment's been made.
The speculation's been made. There are financial
commitments that have been made. The land is
generally, in many cases, either within the city
limits, and you've got to allow them to do
something or you've got to buy it. And they figured
out a few years ago that simply buying the Barton
Creek floodplain, the creek itself and the
adjacent land to it, not the entire drainage area,
would run somewhere in the vicinity of $125
million. Well, $125 million for the city of Austin
is a massive development just to protect the
bottom of the creek, when in fact you have to
control the slopes and sides and the watershed to
protect it. Well, that's an economic
infeasibility. It just cannot be done. Now, so
here's the kind of massive problems that you're
facing. Others have spoken of the southwest
corridor. in a kind of a vague way on tape, and I
haven't quite understood what they meant. Well,
the problem is you're moving into a recharge zone
with some difficulties in terms of servicing.
It's going to be costly to service. It's this hilly
terrain. And the outcome beyond that is that if you
look around, there are a lot of areas in Austin that
have problems of tremendous nature. For example,
the East Austin area, east of the interstate,
where most of the black, or I shouldn't say most, a
large percentage of the black population
resides, heavily black populated
neighborhoods, is suffering terrible housing
problems over there. The deteriorated figures
are running over 50%. There is absolutely no
economic investment, no incentive, There was a
bank established not too many years ago just right
next to the interstate with the idea that it would
service the area, be committed to it. Well, it gave
up this past year and moved to the other side of the
interstate. Symbolically, they could not remain
in that community. There is no investment in that
area. It's blighted. It's deteriorating. And
it's got to the point that if I was in a position to
say something one way or the other, I would be
saying, let's get the most vigorous code
enforcement program we can in there and tear down
every house and building we can. And hopefully
create a widely devastated area that's vacant so
that we can hopefully rebuild. Because it's to the
point that it's almost that hopeless. I'm not sure
that we can do anything with that area. From a
professional standpoint, that would have to be my
recommendation, regardless of the social
impacts. And my argument would be that people
would be better off living elsewhere. Now, that's
always a hard thing to say when there's some sense
of viable community there in some of that area. So,
you know, Austin has that as a problem. They've got
a transportation problem that's acute. Their bus
system is lousy. It falls off every chart I've ever
seen in terms of level of acceptable service or
service frequencies. You know, it's below poor.
You know, it just doesn't exist on the charts
during the day time. It's costly. It has no method
of permanent funding. Every year they have to go in
and battle taxes. And so
the outcome is that with everything going up
associated with transportation, energy, oil,
tires,
it's a mess. I don't see where the improvement is
going to come from. committee here in town is
committed to light rail. Well, light rail is
wonderful. I would love to have a choo-choo train,
too, but the land patterns of Austin are in no way
amenable to it. The densities are wrong, and it
gives you no flexibility whatsoever, and it's
going to be extremely costly. Are we running out of
time?
And And I don't mean to imply that people aren't
aware of these problems. For instance, they have
initially lined up in the legislature this year
the possibility or prospect of creating a transit
district. This will be a bill that will be
introduced during this legislative session,
which allows the voters, by referendum, to
establish a district. And it creates the enabling
legislation for every city in the state of Texas of
over 300 they're not sure how it'll be written, but
probably over 350,000 population, to initiate a
referendum. Well, this would be El Paso and
Austin. And anything above. And anything above
that wants to try again, like Dallas and Fort
Worth, should they ever decide to try it again. And
from all the literature, certainly the only way to
solve the problem would be through...
establishing a permanent trust fund through some
taxing our transit district rather than having
them to go and fight with the rest of the city for the
budget. The rapid growth has created some
problems in terms of recreation also in parks in
the city of Austin and that is the parks department
is having a I think, is a very effective department
from what I've seen and what they're doing. And I
think they've got the priorities right. But the
outcome, of course, is that with the tremendously
rapid growth, this creates tremendous demand and
strain on their system, rapidly expanding
system. At the same time, people are saying, let's
hold down prices. Let's not increase taxes and so
forth and so on. Well, that's not what they need
either. So they've made the decision that
essentially most of their money is going to be
spent on purchasing of land and creating a land
reserve for future development of parks. They
know if they don't get the land today or in the near
future, they're not going to get it. Well, you turn
around, this means they're creating a rather
large backlog of undeveloped parks. And in fact,
We have at least one nice little linear park in
South Austin that's supposed to tie into Town Lake
that has never been developed. It's been on the
city tax rolls or city park rolls now since the 40s,
undeveloped. And this happens to run through a
predominantly Mexican-American section of
town, and this has become a focal point for an
active community association to begin to focus
some attention and some grievances on some
problems that the city has managed to ignore. It's
a typical thing. The squeaky wheel is going to get
attention and create some improvements. So you
begin with the problem of saying, well, we've got
to do this for the long term. But on the other hand,
we've got to solve some of these short range
problems. And there's not money for both. And it
creates a very complex situation. Austin is
fortunate in that generally, the citizens have
been willing to support bond issues at a level that
I find very difficult to believe after I've worked
and seen other communities operate. We did have a
major bond proposal shot down, package shot down.
as it was last year. But it was mainly tended to be a
response to some growth issues and some concern
over the direction of growth and where it was going
to be located. Interestingly enough, things that
the voters perceived as being needed and that did
not have negative growth connotations,
environmental impacts associated with them,
like the parks package, the police package, the
EMS package, the fire department package, were
all funded. On things that failed were things like
the sewer development plant, which included a
major interceptor line running into a recharge
area, a water line that would open up one of these
sensitive areas for development that was part of a
larger package. Well, the city is committed to
developing those areas. People own the land. They
have the right to develop. And with the wonderful
municipal utility district laws of the state of
Texas, if the city refuses to hook people up,
ultimately they're going to be able to establish
their own municipal utility district and build
anyway. The problem is that the city of Austin
really is not in a good position to say no. It cannot
say no under the state law of Texas. It can slow you
down and make your life miserable, but it cannot
stop growth from occurring. It can make it more
attractive in some other areas. Dick Lowy
commented in much the same way on this point. And of
course, it must be a source of tremendous
frustration Oh, it is. The city is essentially
left with the prospect of saying, well, we're
either going to leave you on your own as a rural and
incorporated subdivision with the prospect that
you may at some time be brought into the city with an
inadequate infrastructure and inadequate
utility system, or else you're going to
incorporate and form your own community within
the geographic region and base of the city. One
commitment the city of Austin has is not to allow
that to happen. They look at Dallas, they look at
even more substantially cities in the Northeast,
and there is a commitment that the city of Austin,
as it is growing, will maintain control over what
it perceives to be its political and economic
region. It will not allow a series of
fractionalized rural communities and villages
to grow up which will derive most of the sustenance
from the city as a whole while not paying a
reasonable share for the support of that city. And
I don't think anybody politically in the city of
Austin is going to take any other position. To a
certain extent, certain neighborhoods and
communities are beginning to have some qualms
because they don't feel they're getting quite the
level of service and attention as quickly as they
should get. when there's a lot of money being
pumped into these rural and outlying areas. But
we've almost got ourselves in Austin to the point
that we can't get off the horse. Because we have got
ourselves committed in terms of funding
programs, in terms of utilities. And for
instance, we own our city electric system, which
is a source of probably considerable comment. The
county owns the hospital. And the county owns,
well, we own the hospital. Oh, the city does. The
city owns the hospital. That's a continuing
source of political debate. Yeah. And
essentially, we... are like New York, have our own
welfare system in the city of Austin, and like
everybody else in the world, because we own our
hospital. And we supply to residents free medical
care as necessary, which I don't argue with
personally, but it's costly. It adds up. Well, in
the case of the electric department, we are so
overcommitted in terms of generation capacity.
Particularly if new facilities come online, if we
ever get South Texas Nuclear Project open and
running ever, we will be so over committed in terms
of generation capacity that if we don't grow, the
cost of electricity is going to go up at over twice
the rate of which we currently project the cost to
go up. In other words, we're looking at, say, a
continuing increase of about 6% a year, if I
remember my numbers right. If we don't grow at a
certain percentage rate that's been geared into
this projection, we will trip up to about 10% a year
increase, which gets pretty substantial. It's
already high. And it's a very high rate as it is. So
by continuing to grow, we're holding the ultimate
cost of our electricity down. But if we don't grow,
that means all of us that are here are going to have
to pay more money in the future. And I don't know
what the outcome of that is going to be, but it
certainly seems... I think Lily mentioned
selling, but Austin's currently selling
electricity in Houston. Oh yes, we are. And we
increased the cell contract to Houston. Houston
is, in fact, paying us $18 million a year just for
the right to buy electricity from us. That doesn't
include the purchase of the electricity. That's
just the right million and a half dollars a month
just to be able to buy electricity, if they need it.
And then they will pay premium price, maximum
price, for the electricity we generate. And we'll
sell the cheaper electricity we generate from our
coal plant and the nuclear plant, ultimately, to
the citizens. Well, this is one way to hold down
that 6%. That pared it back down. you know again you
know I'm not sure that that's necessarily a good
way to go about making money um you know you
certainly don't want to be in a position of not
being able to have power and I certainly think that
this is some of the decisions that we've made in
regard to electrical energy are probably better
ones because you know if you ever get behind and
have to buy it you can uh you can be in the position of
Houston paying somebody for the right to maybe buy
it someday and Con Ed And New York faced that
problem of having to buy electricity over a long
period of time in large quantities. And the
outcome was the system essentially went to a point
of being bankrupt and having the highest electric
rates in the US. Your former home state of Utah was
entirely blacked out yesterday. Which is another
good reason to show that we ought to be putting
money into maintenance. And the point that a lot of
people don't include is, what is the cost of that
blackout in terms of lost work time, lost sales,
equipment damage, accidents? And if you look at
the social cost and consequences, just to the
disruption of business, the cost is tremendous.
They couldn't pump gas for police cars. Our
ambulances are fire trucks, and your pumps go off
for your water system, and suddenly you don't have
water to fight fires. It goes on and on. So
certainly that is something that we have to try. We
have to have it, and we don't know what the answer to
that issue is. In terms of opportunities...
You know, Austin's growing. It's got a healthy
economy. It's vigorous. We've got a tremendously
educated and versatile population. Site-wise,
it's well located climatically. It's not really
that humid. And on the other hand, we're not quite
as hot as Dallas in the summertime, and we're not
quite as cold as them in the winter. Not quite as
humid as College Station. Yeah. a little bit more
pleasant all the way around. There's a lot of
activities. State capitals are kind of a funny
beast, per se, because they always seem to have a
good stable economy because there's a large state
bureaucracy located there that's, if not paid
well, at least paid adequately. And you
frequently see a major university there. We have
the University of Texas here you know, some
44,000, 45,000 students that are willing to work
cheap and also a well-educated faculty and
talented researchers. This brings a lot of
culture and diversity into the community that a
community this size would not otherwise have or
would probably be paying through the nose in order
to try to maintain a semblance of it.
We have a lot of theaters, very good cultural
facilities, good restaurants, a diverse
population and ethnically, which I think adds to a
community.
So I'm not too concerned about the future of Austin
as I might be about a lot of other communities.
Well, I've heard it said by some people outside of
Austin who know Austin rather well and may have
lived here, in fact, in the past. that they feel
that Austin should have stopped four years ago.
Oh, well, yeah, everybody says that. They do. All
right. Well, now, why do people say that? And why do
they feel that what's being done now is contrary to
the best interests of Austin? Oh, I think there's a
lot of romanticism attached with when we were
young. I think that people remember Austin from
the time they went to the University of Texas here
and what a good time it was. Indeed. And I think a lot
of us look back at our undergraduate days and say,
maybe that was the best time of my life. In many
ways, I was young, healthy, and I really didn't
realize all of the limitations I really have. Did
you go to UT, also? No. I was wondering. No. But I
appreciated the social life at Texas. Matter of
fact, my junior year, I spent as much time over here
as possible. I left Aggieland on weekends. There
wasn't much to do that attracted me there.
Difficult. Yes. But the outcome, of course, is
that we remember the way things were and were
attracted to it. In a lot of ways, Austin in the 50s
and maybe the 60s
probably was kind of the optimum as a community
because if you're looking at a population, say,
somewhere between 50,000, which it was in the 40s,
running up to maybe 150,000 to 200,000, you really
don't have some of the complex social problems
that you have with a larger community. The taxes
are generally quite moderate and low because you
don't have the level and cross-section of demand
of social structures and problems. The community
wasn't growing. Its infrastructure was largely
paid for. Its park system was developed and
operating and adequate to its population. So we
can look back at it and say, hey, that was a good
balance. It had museums. It had reached perhaps
the minimum level of critical mass to support an
incredible variety of community services. Yes,
and an incredible variety of recreational
activities and restaurants. But at the same time,
it hadn't got to the point that suddenly we really
had to begin to pay for a lot of the additional costs
that occur with growth. And the cedar is coming
out. No, the cat. The cat. Oh. So the outcome, of
course, is that a lot of us would look back and say,
oh, wasn't that wonderful? That's what we really
want. And we look back and say, gee, I could have
managed to buy a house very reasonably, a very nice
house. Today, you know, I can barely afford to pay
my electric bill. Taxes are high. And so, and it's
harder to get around. You know, today you cannot
really drive around Austin that easily. Okay, so I
think a lot of people will look back and they will
pick some time in the past and say Austin should
have stopped there. Now, some of the old timers
should have said it's been like, you know, it's
gone downhill since the GIs got back during World
War II. World War II was the best time ever. All the
students were gone, and it was decent for a change.
You could drive through the University of Texas
and get a parking place on campus. Incredible.
Yeah, impossible.
Probably the 50s and 60s, in many ways, were kind of
a peak period for the city of Austin. There was a lot
of self-confidence, and we weren't that
sensitive to some of the problems that existed. It
was no big deal that certain parts of Boston had
flooding problems and that certain people didn't
live very well or had very inadequate houses, or
their incomes were extremely low. So I think a lot
of the sensitivity that we're aware of in terms of
our problems today, we just didn't have back then.
But if we really look back at it, And for some
people, it really wasn't that good a period. So
there's a lot of trade-offs in every community.
And I think that Austin is facing those today. In a
way that they've never had in the past. In a way that
they've never had to do in the past. This creates a
lot of concern. There's a lot of people that feel
like they're losing status and position. There's
a much greater turmoil and changeover. You've got
major industries coming into town that are
beginning to employ people for, if not decent
wages, at least certainly adequate wages. TI,
Westinghouse, Motorola, IBM. or major employers
in town. And they, although don't pay at the scale
they do in St. California, they are certainly
paying above what has been the tradition in the
service industries associated with Austin. So,
you know, you begin to see people having
opportunities in Austin. It's not a matter of if
you lose your job with the city or Texas University
or the state bureaucracy that you're suddenly
forced to necessarily leave town. Mm-hmm. There
are many departments at Texas that are just
frantic because they can't keep the people
employed because the people were committed to
living in Austin, but suddenly they find they can
make what they're worth by going across the street
to IBM. And this just distresses people that we
can't maintain things the way they were. I think
having more opportunities in many ways is better
for Austin and its residents than, say, it was
during the 50s and 60s. I would have taken a real
financial beating to try to live here in the 50s or
60s, I think, as compared to today. Not that I'm
doing that well today. Well, who is at the
university level? Yes. Kevin, thank you very much
for your views on Austin. It will make a real
contribution to the book, I'm sure. If anything
else comes up, keep in touch, and we'll add it to the
transcriptions. Appreciate it. Thank you.